awesome well
um
i was actually at a dinner that loom was
hosting last night and people were like
you and enrique mutiny brax that's such
an unlikely pairing
but we actually go way back so mutiny's
first office was brax
yeah so um we i think we're your first
customer you were definitely one of our
first customers yeah yeah we were one of
your first we you were one of our first
customers as well so the relationship
goes a long time
yeah and so we were in the brex office
and they had just raised this huge round
and had gotten this really big office
and me and my co-founder we were going
through yc so we were sitting in the
back of the office
and every day they would hire 10 more
people and the line just kept getting
closer and closer to us and we're like
please just don't make us switch offices
while we're in yc
but um your growth has continued what uh
what funding round are you at now uh we
are series d now um how about you guys
um so we just did our we just announced
our series a with sequoia oh that's
amazing congratulations thank you thank
you awesome well i know the name of this
session changed a couple of times so
i'll start by sharing what we're going
to talk about and hopefully that's
interesting to everybody here
um our focus for today is going to be
and let's see where this slides perfect
um it's going to be how to design a
product that your customers love by
thinking differently
so as enrique and i were and our teams
were talking about this session
uh we realized that a lot of
conventional wisdom is great but a lot
of the things that had made brax and
mutiny
successful
stemmed from decisions that we made very
differently than what other people had
done
and you know that's really where the
edge for a disruptive company comes from
and we thought there's not a lot of
content on
how to
you know lean into your own intuition
and diversity and so we wanted to do was
go through a relatively basic framework
of
market product team and failures which
are four big themes for every every
founder and every product manager that's
going through that zero to one journey
and share our anecdotes and stories and
decisions that we made differently that
ended up being really valuable for us
so let's start with market
okay well enrique do you want to do you
want to kick us off what were some of
the things you guys did at brax to
understand your market that was unique
to your approach
yeah for sure so i think when we uh brex
actually came out of a pivot so um pedro
my co-founder and i we got into y
combinator actually this virtual reality
idea we had done a fintech startup in
brazil we had sold it and we're like
we're done with fintech we're never
going to do fintech again all these
banks are so complicated like we want to
do something the bleeding edge of
technology we just got silicon valley
like bill gates and steve jobs and all
these like amazing people did so we're
gonna do virtual reality that seems like
you know super in the bleeding edge of
technology in 2017.
and um and we had this idea and thank
god we got into y combinator but three
weeks into yc we were like okay i don't
really know what we're doing here maybe
we should pivot um
and we started thinking about ideas and
we're like okay which market should we
go into
and we're like well
you know we kind of know a lot about
fintech um because we've done that
startup before and you know one of the
advice i got that i thought was super
helpful is not only thinking about the
product market fit what's what's the
founder market fit like why you as a
founder are uniquely positioned
to
do you know this startup right and
we you know we were we were young and uh
we were thinking okay like why are we in
nuclear's position well we've done
fintech before and we're from brazil so
maybe that's you know maybe that's the
edge
um so we're okay let's go back to
fintech
and uh you know and then we eventually
landed in corporate cards and then
you know but when we started validating
the idea it was it was kind of
you know it it was not super intuitive
how to think about it because
we found a set a small set of customers
that said like i would really love this
like i really need this which were
startups
when we talked to more traditional
businesses they were like oh amex
already kind of works i don't know but
startups are like yeah i know i really
need this like this would be much better
like this really
really is bad today
um so we decided to start with credit
card for startups but
it wasn't super clear back then that you
know for us it was super clear like we
thought we could expand from startups to
something else but every time we went to
talk to investors they were like look
enrique and pedro you guys seem great
but you know i don't know about the tam
of this thing you know i don't know like
startups like are there enough startups
to build a big business you know i can
see why startups would choose you i
can't see why other companies would
choose you
yeah and you know honestly we kind of
didn't know yet we just thought we were
we're going to be able to expand to
other markets after we'll figure
something out but right now startups
just seemed like enough
um
and and we did so we decided to be brex
how most people knew us at the time is
uh you know the corporate card for
startups and uh it came from really
solving you know problems of like a
small population but then after you have
size and scale and you know you can
build so much more you have so much more
capacity to build right because i think
one of the early constraints of product
market fit is
you can't build things that are too
complex because you don't have a lot of
resources so you you need to go for
things that are like kind of simple you
know because you only have a couple
engineers and
you know you maybe you and your
co-founder but then after you already
grew and you have the expanding is much
easier because now you can build more
complex things because you have a lot
more resources you know have more teams
you have existing customers the
opportunities for expansion
um go a lot further than we thought and
you know i think
since then there's other products and
companies that position themselves to
startups but
uh i like to think that you know we were
probably one of the first to
to do it uh you know in a pretty uh
scalable way so that was a little bit of
some anecdotes around us thinking about
our market how about you jolly tell me
about how is for mutiny uh yeah and i
was gonna say i feel like i would have
loved to see your first pitch deck where
you had to make up the tam
yc whatever num they would you know
advise you to come up with
do the math and then at the end it was
like no no it needs to be billions
though so do the math again we were very
generous
yeah
so um a little bit of context about
mutiny uh so my co-founder and i both
worked at gusto i led marketing and he
was leading one of our engineering teams
and basically
at gusto through a lot of manual work a
lot of
growth engineering data science
we had figured out how to
help
convert our top of funnel traffic so
advertising content marketing seo into
actual revenue and upsell and referral
customers and we were we had built a lot
of that experimentation framework
bespoke and so the catalysts were
starting mutiny was that we realized
that what we had done was something that
everybody would eventually need but
wouldn't necessarily have the
engineering and the technical
capabilities to go build that from
scratch and so we wanted to build a no
code platform that any company without
you know being super technical could use
to convert and personalize for their
different audiences
and so
um you know we had this really big
vision and um the convention wisdom i
think at the time was
you know and i'm sure you guys have all
heard this which is startups are
inherently very chaotic and you should
expect wild iteration and you know there
should be mess all over the walls
otherwise you're not you know you're not
doing your job and i think while that's
true there is a lot of iteration um
because we had a clear sense of what we
were going to build um we wanted to also
create
structure and stability
within which we could do our iteration
so one of the best things that we did
early on was we we took a step back and
said for our vision to be true what are
the hypotheses that need to come true
um so so what are sort of smaller
statements that need to be true and we
ended up creating five hypotheses each
one with a metric
um that if all of those we were right
about and we could make them happen then
we could you know mutiny would be this
huge success so for example
the first hypothesis was around data um
because you know we were building this
personalization and conversion engine
and so the first hypothesis was
that we had to be able to
identify over 50 percent of the buyers
and customers within any channel that we
operated in so if we were helping
personalized websites we had to be
figure out how to get to above 50
actionable coverage
of the visitors that were coming to that
website and if we had that then we would
be able to um you know apply the
subsequent steps
and so
you know that framework ended up
paying off a lot of dividends for us in
the early days because even though we
made a lot of changes and we would move
really fast between what areas of the
business we were investing in the early
team was able to
operate in this really holistic way
understand exactly why we were making
the changes that we were
and it also helped us a lot in
recruiting where people wanted to kind
of you know the big vision sometimes
it's it's a little too big and they
don't necessarily understand all the
pieces that goes into that but once we
broke it down into the hypothesis and
metrics and could explain what were the
projects and the road map associated
with each of those it made it a lot more
tangible for everybody to kind of wrap
their head around
so moving on to
i keep looking behind me i'm just
trained on stages that are that are
right behind you so moving on to product
i think this is a big topic for a lot of
product managers and founders right
do you
how do you iterate do you listen to your
customers do you not listen to your
customers um what were some of the
things that brex did differently enrique
to help iterate your product
so i think that the way that we you know
brex has a
an interesting property which is
everyone needs
a version of what we're doing right so
if you're starting a business you will
need a corporate credit card from
someone it might not be from brex
hopefully it is but um you'll you'll
need a corbett card from someone
so our
the thing that we always thought about
is like look how can we be better than
the ones that exist right like how can
we build a better value proposition
that's like very obvious
um you know and and then
obviously better than the one that
already exists
and that's a little bit of a different
challenge than um other companies uh
which you know are have different uh
advanced pros and cons but um that are
trying to sell a product that you don't
yet
know that you need or you maybe don't
know that you know you need and you have
to convince uh
the company to to adopt this new thing
so for us it was a little bit of a
different game we like kind of like okay
everyone needs this we just need to be
better than the other guy and we're like
asking founders and like hey
if we built a cart that
gave you a higher limit with no personal
guarantee of amazing rewards and super
easy to use kind of like technology that
seems like every other product you use
and not like bangs
would you use it
um
a lot of people said yes i would say not
everyone said yes i would say like a
good amount of people said yes but then
our thing is like okay can we actually
do that we didn't know yet if it was
possible doing it like when financial
services there's a lot of complications
and restrictions and regulatory and
financial implications like it's it's
it's pretty hard to build but we knew
that if we got to the promised land of
offering these four things to customers
that at least you know in the segment
that we were looking for they they would
sign up so we kind of like um
worked backwards from there of like hey
what would the kind of the value
proposition that most people would say
yes to
how do we make that economically viable
and how do we make that good
um
i think that's how we we started i think
we were lucky that
we were also startups and we were
serving startups
because
that just kind of gave us a very good
intuition around what the product you
know the the the customers wanted and
being super transparent as we try to
expand outside of startups you know we
we recently
have become successful at it but we
struggled for a while because we're like
okay like we don't know the customer as
well as we knew this one before
um and we had some we had trouble like
empathizing and we built some wrong
stuff and you know we iterated and
um i think you know i probably was not
talking enough to customers when we try
to expand outside of startups but
uh but then we kind of got back to you
know the
yc advice of just you know talk a lot to
your customers and we kind of got back
to it so i think a lot of times you know
founders have the early
customer you have really good intuition
around because that's kind of where you
came your idea and you started working
but then when if you had to expand to
larger customers or different segments
or whatever the expansion is you know
it's a little bit harder to do that so
you need to kind of go back to you know
just talking and listening a lot to
customers as well
and i think the other point is
that we
we also made a mistake here uh you know
sometimes is like
is sometimes talking to customers
wanting to validate something that's
already in your head because you know
it's doable
um and i think
you know it's
i i the ways we were more successful is
when we were talking to customers
without knowing what we were going to
build like we were pivoting or you know
when we're
without having any expectations and then
listening really deeply and then
figuring out what to do so but i'm
curious for you you know you guys have
also
um iterated and built the product over
over a few years now i'm curious what
were the learnings like mistakes and
things that you guys got right around
around this yeah so um early on we set
this value that
we were gonna
make a decision around who our ideal
customer profile was going to be and we
knew that there'd be some people out of
that that we would eventually remove but
once we
qualified somebody and they purchased
mutiny
everything that
they did wrong so every failure was our
fault and ultimately you know even
though
you know we started selling to customers
after three weeks of building the
product right so there was a lot of
stuff that wasn't yet built into the
product but we ultimately took it as our
responsibility to help them be
successful
and so we were really really hands-on
with customers and we would do things
like for instance we would say we want
you to implement this beta feature
and we would agree to a timeline and
they would go and implement and if they
came back and said oh i was planning on
giving this back to you on wednesday but
instead it's going to be next monday we
would get really curious like why did it
take you so long what went wrong what
was harder than you thought because we
wanted to understand what are all of the
paper cuts that are happening behind the
scene outside of our product and can we
chip away at all of those
bottlenecks for the customer eventually
with the product
and so one instance for us was that
people would come into mutiny having a
sense of okay these are 20 different
segments that i want to you know
personalize for and increase conversion
for
but then
they would get stuck and not know okay
which one
do i do first and second and third and
it would take each one you know would
take them a little bit of effort to
launch
and so
um what we started doing was pulling the
data for them manually right not
worrying that
we were doing the work manually and that
it wasn't going to scale we would just
say let's help solve this problem for
you manually first and then we'll worry
about whether we can automate it so we
started pulling data for custom early
customers uh pulled a lot of data for
for brax because you guys we didn't even
have we had we didn't have a user
interface when you started using mutiny
and then we would put that into google
sheets we would uh prioritize the data
ask the customer a lot of questions
about is this the right information what
else would you want to see what's here
that you don't need that doesn't help
you
that's just clutter and eventually once
we figured out the exact information
that they needed with that
prioritization decision we built this
really nice data visualization flow
inside of our app where as they would
select segments they would see exactly
the info that they needed comparison of
that segment to other segments that let
them make decisions really quickly
inside of the app and essentially turn
what was taking them you know sometimes
up to two weeks
um and actually for some customers
resulting in them not even you know
moving forward to now a few seconds
within within the mutiny app
that's awesome
yeah
okay team this one i feel like you're
gonna be amazing at this enrique is the
best recruiter i've ever met he just
always for every role you know who the
best people are in the valley and you
somehow find your way to them
what are what are you doing differently
to help recruit talent
so first i am not the world's best
recruiter because i had a big failure
because before jolly started mutiny i
tried to convince her to join brex but
her mind was set in starting company
which now it's been very successful but
um so i had a big failure early on
um but happy happy the way things turn
out so i think we were like
really
aggressive with recruiting i would say
in a sense of
we
made a lot of decisions around like how
can we get the best talent i think
you know
i think a lot of founders and stars like
hey this is the way i want the company
to build this is exactly what i believe
in this is like you know a bunch of like
things that are fixed
and then
you know you try to recruit and there's
like some differences and you know
people stick to it and i think there's
like a there's a there's a there's a
bullish case for that there's a little
bit of a
not a bullish case for that i think for
us especially early on we're like look
there's so many smart people in the
valley especially like executives
we want our culture to be helped being
shaped by them like so we hired
our i would say our cfo for example
their general counsel early on
and you know we actually wanted them to
help build our culture right and like we
wanted the company not just me me about
what pedro and i wanted but them having
also like a say on like how we're
building things
um around and
you know and i think that was super
positive i think like we we came out a
much stronger culture right than uh than
than if we had not done that
um
and i think that
we we just found a way so like you know
again we gave a lot of equity for early
hires plus we were generous of cash plus
you know we gave titles like we you know
all these things like people give you
the advice of like hey constrained and
restricted and we're like
i get it
why that would be true in the ideal
world but all in together i just want
the best people you know like because
that can make such a massive difference
like i came from brazil and you know we
built a company there there wasn't like
really good executives in brazil at the
time because there wasn't like a startup
ecosystem right that people had gone
through these growth stage companies
and we just had to do everything and
learn everything ourselves and then we
got here and we had you know for example
our cfo and like we just didn't have to
worry about finance everything was like
done and it's perfect it's like much
better than we would do and we're like
oh my god this is amazing like how much
time can this save me to go like do
other things you know and like make us
world-class in this thing that's super
important for us to be a world class so
we're super grateful for our early hires
and early executives that joined brex
and you know till this day we have this
culture of like let's you know let's get
the best people in the world like how do
we do that like let's you know let's
change and let's adapt so we can keep
attracting
um the best people in the world
and then the other thing i'd say is
historically
especially for early stage companies
hiring people who have been through
other startups before helps a lot
um
you know i think people who
who've been in big companies there's a
lot of very smart people but the the
life of a startup is just like so much
different that a lot of the experience
is like not super relevant so it's
almost like starting from scratch again
so if you can
if you can get someone that has gone
through like startups before you know
especially growth stage startups
that is like really
a big indicator of the person is gonna
work or not work and at least that has
been like our experience
um especially if you know in the
executive level now that we're bigger
you know like we we need people who've
seen bigger companies but early on like
that was like probably one of our main
heuristics is like hey if you've been
the number two
at like a successful startup that kind
of grew you know and you saw that whole
growth and maybe you know i want to be
the number one somewhere else
you know that's like a really good
profile so that's what we learned but
i think also like the reason people give
that advice uh of don't give out a lot
of cash and titles
is because people are worried about
retention of well are they going to stay
or are they joining you for the wrong
reasons but you've had really great
retention especially for a lot of those
you know early critical hires
um
yeah i
i don't
really
but you know just remember i don't
really buy the argument of like people
joining for for for a lot of wrong
reasons i think like especially in the
early stages
if you're
you know if the company has a chance of
not working and you're devoting your
life to this thing like that's the right
reason you know like it's you have so
many opportunities if you're good you
have so many opportunities and you're
choosing to join this early stage
startup by two random brazilian dudes
you know that's like the
there couldn't be a better reason than
that so
and if you need a little bit more cash
because you have like a high mortgage or
something or you know you want to get a
lot of equity because you know you
really want to get a lot of equity like
i don't know i i feel that just uh when
you're bigger it's different because you
know then people would have different
reasons but when you're early there's so
much risk involved that like i don't
really see
you know a lot of really good people
joining for wrong reasons you know
that's really good advice i think
especially in this recruiting market
exactly yeah um so on our end the thing
that we did differently early on was for
a few really critical roles that were
very unique to mutiny
we built the function based on our needs
and not what was considered world-class
for that function
and this was very different than the
best practices that i had learned you
know when i was at gusto if we were
hiring for a new role the first thing
that we would do is if we were hiring a
product manager go talk to five of the
best product managers learn the
interview process and then you know
figure out how to find somebody like
that
but for us for example our uh customer
success function
uh was very unique in that
we needed to be both analytical but also
creative
and this was really evident in from the
early days of even when i was helping
customers one-on-one and so when i was
building out the function and hiring our
first person i didn't talk to anybody
from
customer success departments i just
wrote out the things that were really
important
and
i started filtering for those things on
linkedin so our first hire molly
she was a math major
who
was doing you know personalization um
and was a consultant so she had the
customer experience
but she was also in writing competitions
and she just was a beautiful writer and
it was very clear that she has kind of
the you know left brain right brain
combo
and then
she did such a great job she now leads
that department and her first hire was a
film major
who became you know a
who moved into marketing analytics and
it set this very unique dna of people
that are good with customers but have
this very unique mix of art and science
that's very important for us
and now i would say like when i talk to
other uh other companies within our
space they're always trying to figure
out like wow how did you guys build your
cs department and it's like well we
didn't really build a traditional cs
department i do think following
conventional wisdom on a lot of the
roles where you don't need to be
different is good like you can very
quickly get yourself to best practices
and make fewer hiring mistakes but
definitely listen to your instincts if
there are areas that you think you need
to operate very differently than how
other companies are doing it and maybe
we'll move on to failures this is a
favorite topic
um
for for going from zero to one any
failures for you enrique that helped you
think differently about how you were
building the business
i think that you know one
one thing that happened
to us and i i kind of alluded this for
for a little bit is
when
there was this some point in brex in
which like we you know we became really
obsessed with like strategy
and you know we just we were reading all
these strategy books and like we got
like
super obsessed about building the best
strategy and we started building all
these things would be like strategically
amazing for us
um but we just kind of like forgot to
talk if the customers wanted it um
and i think that was like a pretty big
failure and process in my view of like
how do you combine you know kind of
doing things that are good for for for
the company and a strategic for you to
do and and you know and i really love
this um
then i was getting advice about our
advisors and like yeah man you know
there's this concept called strategy tax
it's like what's the strategy tax the
strategy tax is when you you know you do
something that's like good would be
amazing for the company
but you know you just forget to talk see
if your customers actually want it and
um i think we probably had
one or two of those that i think were
really good lessons because now we're
like the process of like building
products we're just so obsessed of just
building things we know and we're pretty
sure customers will want instead of
things that you know will be strategic
for us to have so i think that's my my
anecdote there how about you
um so in the early days we
set revenue as a goal so three weeks
into
writing our first line of code we had
revenue goals and we set those goals by
looking at companies in our space that
were like in analytics for example that
were a few years ahead of us and looking
back at what was their revenue
trajectory
and we set those goals and part of the
reason we did that was i remember when
we were going through yc one of the
one of the partners the guy from
initialize he uh he gave a talk that
really resonated with me which is you
know when you're starting something you
really want it to work and you're not
always going to see
your reality as it is because you you
just so desperately want to be right
about the quality of what you're
building and so the you should always be
clear about what are the most important
metrics and whatever metric or graph you
don't want to show to your board is what
you should be showing to everybody
because that's the thing that you need
to fix immediately and so we decided to
set revenue goals very early on because
for us revenue everything ultimately
showed up in revenue and it made it very
difficult to hide from problems right we
could see low conversion we could see
churn we could see lack of upsell all of
that would ultimately show up in the
revenue goals
and so that worked really well for us
especially since our market moves really
really quickly but thank you so much i
know a lot of you had a big night last
night so thank you for coming to this
early morning session
um you know i think this is a really
exciting time in the valley where we
talk a lot about diversity and i can't
imagine anything
um
you know more than
where diversity matters more than it
does in in startups because it's really
about leaning into
what makes you different what makes you
choose different paths
and ultimately that should lead to
building a really awesome disruptive
company so thanks for coming thank you
so much everyone
[Music]
you